Proposal H - compatibilities in flat format (#17)
opencontainers/wg-image-compatibility: docs/proposals/PROPOSAL_H.md

# Proposal H - compatibility artifact in flat format

The purpose of the compatibility artifact is to describe compatibility requirements for container images to run on a host.

> This proposal is based on proposal B, F and G with new ideas, some description is kept unchanged and borrowed from these original proposals.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This proposal is based on proposal B, F and G with new ideas; some description is kept unchanged and borrowed from these original proposals.
```

> The design goal is to avoid over-flexible speficication, and avoid abusing the specification.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The design goal is to avoid over-flexible specification, and avoid abusing the specification.
```

Author: forgive me so many spelling issues

It is NOT TO store variation of user configuration of applications in the compatibility artifact.

The first part describes the compatibility artifact manifest.

> The second part focus on how the compatibility requirements to be described in flat format, including image selection and validation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The second part focuses on how the compatibility requirements are to be described in a flat format, including image selection and validation.
```
Including metadata attributes _for_ image selection and validation?

Author: ok, will update in next commit

> The third part provides some examples for easy to follow the ideas.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The third part provides some examples to make it easy to follow these ideas.
```

> The fourth part discusses how the comaptibility spec colloborates with NFD community.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The fourth part discusses how the compatibility spec collaborates with the Node Feature Discovery (NFD) community.
```

The fifth part describes how the compatibility artifact could be linked to the image.

Finally, the last part shows the addressed usage scenarios.

## Artifact Manifest

> The artifact manifest contains ONLY one blob.

Reviewer: I like this - just one thing to parse and download.

```json
{
  "schemaVersion": "0.1.0",
  "mediaType": "application/vnd.oci.image.manifest.v1+json",
  "artifactType": "application/vnd.oci.image-compatibility.v1",
  "config": {
    "mediaType": "application/vnd.oci.empty.v1+json",
    "digest": "sha256:44136fa355b3678a1146ad16f7e8649e94fb4fc21fe77e8310c060f61caaff8a",
    "size": 2
  },
  "layers": [
    {
      "mediaType": "application/nfd.image-compatibility.spec.v1alpha1+json",
      "digest": "sha256:4a47f8ae4c713906618413cb9795824d09eeadf948729e213a1ba11a1e31d052",
      "size": 1710,
      "annotations": {
        "name": "profileH"
      }
    }
  ],
  "annotations": {
    "oci.opencontainers.image.created": "2024-03-27T08:08:08Z"
  }
}
```

The new artifact type for image compatibility MUST be referenced in OCI documentation.

The schema version is to use string semver instead of int version, to help tool in content deserialization.

The media type is defined as nfd.image-compatibility.spec, in order to be defined agnostic to cluster management software.

## image compatibility spec

The spec structure is quite simple, a flat json file. NFD means the Kubernetes node feature discovering SIG.

Schema:

> - **`compatibilities`** *list of compatibility set*

Reviewer: Note that this design / key was originally from proposal C and then the one that subsumed it, Proposal D. The others that now have it followed suit. It might make sense to mention D with the others in your introduction.

Author: yes, all previous precious work should be credited, also the annotations/platform feature idea.

  This REQUIRED property describes all image compatibility sets, contains at least one compatibility set.

>   - **`compatibility set`** *list of compatibility requirement*

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - **`compatibility set`** *list of compatibility requirements*
```

    This REQUIRED property describes compatibility requirements in one compatibility set.

>     If one of the compatibility set passes the compatibility check against the target node, that means the node is compatibile with the image.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    If one of the compatibility set members passes the compatibility check against the target node, that means the node is compatible with the image.
```
Is it parsed from top to bottom like an image manifest list? Or parsed and ordered by score?

Author: could be ordered by score in descending way, may produce better peromance in some scenario.

Author: “one of the compatibility set” members should be ”one of the compatibility sets”

    There are three category key-value pair inside the compatibility set.

    - **`compatibility feature field`**

>       This REQUIRED property describes a feature compatibility requirement on the target host, the field is named with NFD feature label.

Reviewer: This is just a general reference to a key value pair (metadata attribute) within the section? It's up to the community that maintains it to decide the keys/values?

Author: community maintains the keys/values. current NFD feature lables can not meet all wg-image-compatibility demands, so maybe collaboration between two communities

Author: it's better to define OCI labels, for example, in NFD, kernel-config.option-1: "true", kernel-config.option-2: "true", kernel-config.option-n: "true", but for OCI labels, it could be oci.kernel.config: "option-1, option-2, option-n", fixed label name is more friendly.

      The value of compatibility field in the compatibility artifact SHOULD be described in contiguous or discontiguous range if the value discovered on nodes can be different.

>       It's the tool's responsibility to intepret the value and matching critriea with the value discovered from the node via NFD.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      It's the tool's responsibility to interpret the value and matching criteria with the value discovered from the node via NFD.
```

      Inevitablely, some compatibility fields MAY be duplicated among compatibility sets.

      The value type of this field is STRING.

    - **`compatibility score field`**

      This OPTIONAL property describes the score of the compatibility set.

>       Only one compatibility score filed in one compatibility set.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      There is only one compatibility score field allowed in one compatibility set.
```

      The highest score of the compatibility set means this compatibility set is the most optimal one.

      If this field is not present, the score of this compatibility set is 0.

>       If compatibility sets have same score, that means any of these compatibility sets pass the compatibility check is successful in matching the compatibility requirements.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      If compatibility sets have the same score, that means any of these compatibility sets pass the compatibility check is successful in matching the compatibility requirements.
```

      The compatibility-score is used for selecting optimal image in descending order for those compaibility sets pass the comaptibility check.

      The value type of this field is INT.

>     - **`annotation field`**

Reviewer: Why do we need a separate annotation field? Couldn't one of the key value pairs just be used for this purpose?

Author: the author can comment on each compatibility set to provide some human readble information. If there is no annotation inside compatibility set, if there is long list of compatibility fields, hard to figure out what's the difference for different compatibility set.

Reviewer: I am still feeling this is extra.

Reviewer 2: If we decide to keep the list of compatibilities in the final proposal within single artifact then I think it can be useful. 
I would probably change the name from `annotation` to `description`.

Author: >I would probably change the name from annotation to description.

ok, change it to description.

too many annotations in specs

      This OPTIONAL property is a field to describe human readable information regarding to the compatibility set.

      The value type of this field is STRING.

## Artifact example of use

> ### Example - image is comaptible with different hardware combinations

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Example - image is compatible with different hardware combinations
```

```json
{
  "compatibilities": [
    {
      "cpu-model.vendor_id": "GenuineIntel",
      "cpu-cpuid.AVX512FP16": "true",
      "kernel-selinux.enabled": "false",
      "kernel-config.PREEMPT": "true",
      "kernel-version.full": "[4.19, 5.16)",
      "system.glibc": "[2.31, 2.37]",
      "pci-15B3-020D.present": "true",
    },
    {
      "cpu-model.vendor_id": "AuthenticAMD",
      "cpu-cpuid.FPHP": "true",
      "kernel-selinux.enabled": "false",
      "kernel-config.PREEMPT": "true",
      "kernel-version.full": "[4.19, 5.16)",
      "system.glibc": "[2.31, 2.37]",
      "pci-1002-67ff.present": "true",
      "annotation": "only work with AMD CPU and AMD GPU"
    }
  ]
}
```

> ### Example - image is comaptible with optimal hardwares

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Example - image is compatible with optimal hardware
```

      "kernel-version.full": "[4.19, 5.16)",
      "system.glibc": "[2.31, 2.37]",
      "pci-1002-67ff.present": "true",
      "annotation": "only work with AMD CPU and AMD GPU"
    }
  ]
}
```

### Example - image is compatible with optimal hardware

```json
{
  "compatibilities": [
    {
      "cpu-model.vendor_id": "GenuineIntel",
      "cpu-cpuid.AMXFP16": "true",
      "kernel-selinux.enabled": "false",
      "kernel-config.PREEMPT": "true",
      "kernel-version.full": "[4.19, 5.16)",
      "system.glibc": "[2.31, 2.37]",
      "system.openmpi": "[4.1.6, 4.1.6]",
      "pci-15B3-019D.present": "true",
      "compatibility-score": 50,
    },
    {
      "cpu-model.vendor_id": "GenuineIntel",
      "cpu-cpuid.AVX512FP16": "true",
      "kernel-selinux.enabled": "false",
      "kernel-config.PREEMPT": "true",
      "kernel-version.full": "[4.19, 5.16)",
      "system.glibc": "[2.31, 2.37]",
      "system.openmpi": "[4.1.6, 4.1.6]",
      "pci-15B3-020D.present": "true",
      "compatibility-score": 100,
    },
    {
      "cpu-model.vendor_id": "AuthenticAMD",
      "cpu-cpuid.FPHP": "true",
      "kernel-selinux.enabled": "false",
      "kernel-config.PREEMPT": "true",

>       "kernel-version.full": "[4.19, 5.16)",

Reviewer 3: I like the short am simple descriptiveness of it.

One question: Will there be operators to version numbers? So that we can express greater than and exact version matches? Or has minimal version limits had problems in the past?

Reviewer 3: I didn't notice the different brackets, hence my assumption it was exact version matches and not version expressions. In most places I work with minimal version required rather than a fixed version. So I was curious if that leads to problems in the linux world. Would a single version express `>= $VERSION` in this case?

Reviewer 4: This is nit-picking, but I think strings like `>=4.19,<5.16` would be easier for users to use and easier to parse (as well as allowing for more complicated rules, though there is an argument that you don't want to allow super-complicated rules).

Author: > This is nit-picking, but I think strings like `>=4.19,<5.16` would be easier for users to use and easier to parse (as well as allowing for more complicated rules, though there is an argument that you don't want to allow super-complicated rules).

I am open for the format. we have to consider discontinous range(it happened), for example, maybe "4.19 <= version < 5.16, version = 5.17, version >= 6.0" it's also fine. yes, no need to allow super complicated rules.

Author: > This is nit-picking, but I think strings like `>=4.19,<5.16` would be easier for users to use and easier to parse (as well as allowing for more complicated rules, though there is an argument that you don't want to allow super-complicated rules).

As mentioned in the latest commit, "The proposal itself does not intend to define concrete compatibility field labels, it should be a task for separate proposals". More elaboration of field value definition in future proposals

      "system.glibc": "[2.31, 2.37]",
      "system.openmpi": "[4.1.6, 4.1.6]",
      "pci-1002-67ff.present": "true",
      "compatibility-score": 80,
      "annotation": "only work with AMD CPU and AMD GPU"
    }
  ]
}
```

> ## Alternative place to hold compatibility set

Author: @sudo-bmitch the idea here is quite similar as proposal E to reuse platform.features. It's not perfect, but may worth of discussing.

Reviewer 5: We may want to use a different/new field name since there's an implied historical usage of `platform.features`. What happens if both the platform representation and an artifact associated by the referrers API exists? Do runtimes need to query for referrers if the platform field is seen?

Author: +1, any existing field have its own original purpose, and once it was published, it may already be  used (for example, os.features used by Unikraft unikernel images) somewhere, even if it's reserved. 

Extending image spec with new field platform.compatibilities may be better idea. the field is a list of map. will update in next commit.

Then it'll be easier to  address these questions:

> What happens if both the platform representation and an artifact associated by the referrers API exists? Do runtimes need to query for referrers if the platform field is seen?

if platform representation is detected, referrs API query will not be sent

Author: > We may want to use a different/new field name since there's an implied historical usage of `platform.features`. What happens if both the platform representation and an artifact associated by the referrers API exists? Do runtimes need to query for referrers if the platform field is seen?

The section "Compatibilities Embeded Inside Platform Object" is to extend the platform object,  and talk about migration and deprecation path, which was added in the latest commit. It's inspired by the comment and proposal E.

Considering the compatibilities are composed of a list of compatibility set, just similar as the idea in proposal E, the platform.features could be reused.

Each compatibility set will be encoded into a string, then the platform.features can hold all the compatibility artifact content, the downside is the platform.features content is hard to read for human.

Then it's the image author's(or image provider's) freedom to use standalone artifact or platform.features to express the compatibility requirements, the format will be kept same.

To reduce the load to registry, if compatibilities are stored in platform.features(a new filed inside comaptibility set can be used to identify this case), no further api request should be sent to registry to discover the comaptibility artifact.

## Compatibility and NFD filed labels

> If the field is required in image compatibility artifact, but does not present in NFD labels, the new feature lable should be discussed and contributed into NFD.

Reviewer 2: If I understand this correctly, it means that the proposal suggest to use only NFD specific labels, correct?

Reviewer 2: It is also possible to provide custom labels under NFD, without contributing to the project itself.

Author: Mentioned that NFD labels can not meet all OCI compatibility demands,  and some times NFD labels have different purpose. It's better to define OCI labels, for example, in NFD, kernel-config.option-1: "true", kernel-config.option-2: "true", kernel-config.option-n: "true", NFD labels are dynamicly created according to features. 
It's reasonable in NFD to use dynamic labels, beacuse these labels will be applied to nodes. OCI label can be defined in a simpler way, it could be oci.kernel.config: "option-1, option-2, option-n", fixed label name is more friendly, and can be translated to NFD labels. Collaboration is good.

Reviewer 2: So I understand the idea is to go back to the original plan introduced in the proposal B, to define well known labels with the following categories:
* CPU
* Kernel
* Memory
* Network
* PCI
* USB
* Storage
* System
* Local (custom labels)

Reviewer 2: I expressed the idea of know labels in the proposal E that could be well combined with this proposal.
https://github.com/opencontainers/wg-image-compatibility/pull/13#issuecomment-2040131560

      The value type of this field is STRING.

### Artifact example of use

All fields in this section are only for examples.

#### Example - image is compatible with different hardware combinations

```json
{
  "compatibilities": [
    {
      "oci.cpu.vendor": "GenuineIntel",
      "oci.cpu.features": "AVX512FP16,",
      "oci.kernel.selinux": "false",
      "oci.kernel.configurations": "PREEMPT,",
      "oci.kernel.versions": "[4.19, 5.16)",
      "oci.os.glibc": "[2.31, 2.37]",
      "oci.pci.devices": "15B3.020D,",
    },
    {
      "oci.cpu.vendor": "AuthenticAMD",
      "oci.cpu.features": "FPHP,",
      "oci.kernel.selinux": "false"
      "oci.kernel.configurations": "PREEMPT,",
      "oci.kernel.versions": "[4.19, 5.16)",
      "oci.os.glibc": "[2.31, 2.37]",
      "oci.pci.devices": "1002.67ff",
      "annotation": "only work with AMD CPU and AMD GPU"
    }
  ]
}
```

#### Example - image is compatible with optimal hardware

```json
{
  "compatibilities": [
    {
      "oci.cpu.vendor": "GenuineIntel",
      "oci.cpu.features": "AMXFP16,",
      "oci.kernel.selinux": "false"
      "oci.kernel.configurations": "PREEMPT,",
      "oci.kernel.versions": "[4.19, 5.16)",

>       "oci.os.glibc": "[2.31, 2.37]",

Reviewer 6: does this mean that the host system must be glibc based? how does one declare "glibc, any version?" 

Also, this does not handle the use case of long term / enterprise distributions that maybe backport functionality from a newer glibc release into an older glibc release that is installed on the system.

### Migration and Deprecation

The platform.os.version, platform.os.features and platform.features are expected to be migrated to platform.compatibilites fields.

It may take years for the migration.

The deprecation for these fields will start with pre-notification and migration transition period.

Before all runtimes' migration finished, these fields should still be valid.

## Flexibility for Different Purpose

It's the image author's (or image provider's) freedom to use standalone artifact or platform.compatibilities to express the compatibility requirements, the format will be kept same.

The subject field should be used to associate the compatibility artifact with target image. The referrers API should be used to discover artifacts.

The client will query for an artifact using the referrers response, selecting the entry with a matching artifactType and the most recent "created" timestamp.

If platform.compatibilities is detected and not empty, then runtime is not required to send referrs API to query compatibility artifact.

> If there is no platform.compatibilities, or the content of platform.compatibilities is  empty, then runtime should send referrs API to registry to query compatibility artifact.

Author: > then runtime should send referrs API to registry to query compatibility artifact.

it should be configurable whether the runtime or others to send referrers api request or not if  there is no platform.compatibilities field, or the content of it is empty

## Compatibility and NFD filed labels

The proposal itself does not intend to define concrete compatibility field labels, it should be a task for separate proposals.

To free the tools implementation, and make sure the existing os.version, os.features, platform.features can be easily migrated and smoothly deprecated, it's reasonable that minimal set of OCI compatibility fields should be defined in OCI.

These field labels could be easily mapped or translated to NFD field labels.

Because the value of compatibility field SHOULD be described in contiguous or discontinuous range if the value discovered on nodes can be different, NFD labels are dynamicly created according to node features, it's not one to one mapping.

For example, oci.kernel.configurations may containes serveral boot configurations in a single string, but in NFD, different lables like kernel-config.PREEMPT, kernel-config.intel_iommu may be applied.

If the field is required in image compatibilities, but does not present in NFD labels, the new feature lable should be discussed and contributed into NFD.

> It's expected that NFD feature lables definition and node feature discovering could be an independent component in NFD, and could be consumed by different consumers.

Reviewer 7: Nit: "labels" is misspelled as "lables" twice here.

Author: not only "lables" spelling issue... I should use tools to check spelling and grammar next time.

Reviewer 5: With VS Code, the "Code Spell Checker" plugin has saved me so many times.

    If one of the compatibility sets passes the compatibility check against the target node, that means the node is compatible with the image.

    There are three category key-value pair inside the compatibility set.

    - **`compatibility feature field`**

      This REQUIRED property describes a feature compatibility requirement on the target host, the field accepts OCI and community defined labels.

      The value of compatibility field in the compatibility artifact SHOULD be described in contiguous or discontinuous range if the value discovered on nodes can be different.

      It's the tool's responsibility to interpret the value of OCI or community defined feature label, and matching criteria with the value discovered from the node via NFD tool or other tool. NFD means the Kubernetes node feature discovering SIG.

      Inevitably, some compatibility fields MAY be duplicated among compatibility sets.

      The value type of this field is STRING.

    - **`compatibility score field`**

      This OPTIONAL property describes the score of the compatibility set.

      There is only one compatibility score field allowed in one compatibility set.

>       The highest score of the compatibility set means this compatibility set is the most optimal one.

Reviewer: It's not clear to me still how you'd compare between compatibility artifacts. This (still) feels like something dangerous to provide or mention. If a community wants to add a score to their label schema we can't stop them, but I don't see the value to make it an optional field (and suggest it's a good idea). I would argue minimally we remove this for now and only consider it in the future when it's absolutely needed, or call it out of scope for now and consider it part of the next discussion about labels.

Reviewer: The other issue with the score is that it's not really about compatibility, it's going into optimization "works best" and not just "it works."

Reviewer 2: > It's not clear to me still how you'd compare between compatibility artifacts. This (still) feels like something dangerous to provide or mention.

I don't think it's about comparing compatibility artifacts, but about finding the best matching node within a single artifact.

Reviewer: I think optimization is out of scope for compatibility, and a specific label is out of scope for the structure of the artifact discussion.

Author: > It's not clear to me still how you'd compare between compatibility artifacts. This (still) feels like something dangerous to provide or mention. If a community wants to add a score to their label schema we can't stop them, but I don't see the value to make it an optional field (and suggest it's a good idea). I would argue minimally we remove this for now and only consider it in the future when it's absolutely needed, or call it out of scope for now and consider it part of the next discussion about labels.

agree, labels deicussion could be in next phase

      If this field is not present, the score of this compatibility set is 0.

      If compatibility sets have the same score, that means any of these compatibility sets pass the compatibility check is successful in matching the compatibility requirements.

      The compatibility-score is used for selecting optimal image or optimal node in descending order for those compatibility sets pass the compatibility check.

      The value type of this field is INT.

    - **`annotation field`**

      This OPTIONAL property is a field to describe human-readable information regarding to the compatibility set.

      The value type of this field is STRING.

### Artifact example of use

All fields in this section are only for examples.

#### Example - image is compatible with different hardware combinations

```json
{
  "compatibilities": [
    {
      "oci.cpu.vendor": "GenuineIntel",
      "oci.cpu.features": "AVX512FP16,",
      "oci.kernel.selinux": "false",
      "oci.kernel.configurations": "PREEMPT,",

>       "oci.kernel.versions": "[4.19, 5.16)",

Reviewer: We will probably need to discuss how to handle lists (and other non-string types). Arguably you could also do an index added to the key `name.0`

Reviewer 2: This has been discussed here https://github.com/opencontainers/wg-image-compatibility/pull/17#discussion_r1546173866, it's about setting a range for kernel versions.

When it comes to list I think we could just separate elements over white space character.

Author: for the value expression(lists and other non-string types etc), it could be discussed in label defintion phase.

Reviewer: Agree on this point!

      The size limitation 4MiB for image manifest is defined in image distribution spec.

      That also means the size of image index should not exceed 4 MiB, the tools that edit the compatibilities SHOULD deduplicate unnecessary compatibility fields.

      Registry may store manifests in a separate database from the blobs, to serve for frequent access of small but often queried and changing data, large compatibilities and the number of images embededed with compatibilities will change the load pattern to a registry.

      The field label definition should consider the size limitation of image index.

### Deprecation Path

The platform.os.version, platform.os.features and platform.features are expected to be moved to platform.compatibilities fields.

The old usage of these fields is deprecated at some point, but that's often reactionary after popular builders stop using these fields.

Backwards compatibility or graceful degradation should be ensured for these fields where possible with either old images, old builders, and/or old runtimes.

It may take years for the deprecation.

> 

Author: OK, removed in next commit.

If platform.compatibilities is detected and not empty, then runtime is not required to send referrers API to query compatibility artifact.

If there is no platform.compatibilities, or the content of platform.compatibilities is empty, it should be configurable whether to send referrers API to registry to query compatibility artifact.

## Pros. and Cons. Comparison

### Pros. and Cons. of Compatibility Artifact

It's possible to update compatibility independently without having to re-release and re-distribute image.

Becasue artifact can be associated with the target image in on-demand mode, the compatibility artifact can be delivered separately from the image package.

In some vertical industries, re-distributing image means repeating release cycle to production site, it may take several weeks to several months for complex applications, very time-consuming and high cost.

The application using new image has to pass series tests inside vendor's lab and then customer's lab, and then roll out in production site gradually. Tests may include function, performance, reliability, security, inter-working etc.

> 

Author: OK, removed in next commit.

There is no size limitation on compatibility content.

The compatibility artifact can be independent from the runtime running containers, the cluster, including nodes labeling, can be prepared based on images' compatibility artifact before running process.

The cons. of compatibility artifact is, if it's used for image selection or scheduling decision, additional referrers API request should be sent to registry.

> When the compatibility artifact is used for validation purpose, it can be processed without runtime image selection or scheduling decision being involved.

Author: OK, updated in next commit.

If the compatibility artifact is updated with hardwares and/or OS features, or the image manifest digest is updated, the delivered compatibility artifact and image should be reviewed, tested and validated, both in vendor and customer labs.

If compatibility artifact is to be updated and image manifest digest does not change, if the updated artifact is validated that it's compatible with existing running enironment, then the image does not need to do all tests against existing running environment.

> 

Author: OK, removed in next commit.

### Pros. and Cons. of platform.compatibilities

Obviously current API interaction with registry can retrieve the compatibility requirements directly, no additional referrers API request is needed.

There is size limitation for image index, the number of entries in the list of manifests, the number of fields inside platform.compatibilites, are varied on image by image.

It's diffifult to set size limitation on platform.comaptibilites.

Modification to the platform.compatibilities will alter the image index content.

Platform object is usually considered as part of multi-architectures image deliverable.

Image shipping will usually try to ensure the integrity of the image, and prevent unauthorized tampering, thus image index content update will require re-distribute the image for supply chain security.

> It's possible to update the platform.compatibilities independently from the image, if the image manifest digest does not change, it should be reviewed and tested in same way as compatibility artifact.

Author: OK, updated in next commit.

## Compatibility and NFD filed labels

The proposal itself does not intend to define concrete compatibility field labels, it should be a task for separate proposals.

To free the tools' implementation, and make sure the existing os.version, os.features, platform.features can be smoothly deprecated, and reduce the sync. effort between OCI and NFD, it's reasonable just to define minimal set of OCI compatibility fields.

> These field labels could be easily mapped or translated to NFD field labels.

Author: OK, updated in next commit.

    - **`compatibility feature field`**

>       This REQUIRED property describes a feature compatibility requirement on the target host, the field is named with OCI feature label.

Reviewer 5: Changing this from an NFD label to an OCI label I believe means that OCI would be maintaining a parallel spec to NFD and others in this space. That adds the risk that the OCI spec will get out of sync with features of the others, creating complication for users trying to support them all.

Author: OK, to reduce the risk of out of sync, NFD labels could be reused. OCI and NFD may need to collaborate to review all labels, to meet both demands.

Reviewer 2: I would change:
> This REQUIRED property describes a feature compatibility requirement on the target host, the field is named with OCI feature label.

to

> This REQUIRED property describes a compatibility requirement on the target host, the field accepts OCI and community defined labels.

Author: good idea

      "oci.kernel.configurations": "PREEMPT,",
      "oci.kernel.versions": "[4.19, 5.16)",
      "oci.os.glibc": "[2.31, 2.37]",
      "oci.os.openmpi": "[4.1.6, 4.1.6]",
      "oci.pci.devices": "15B3.020D,",
      "compatibility-score": 50,
    },
    {
      "oci.cpu.vendor": "GenuineIntel",
      "oci.cpu.features": "AVX512FP16,",
      "oci.kernel.selinux": "false",
      "oci.kernel.configurations": "PREEMPT,",
      "oci.kernel.versions": "[4.19, 5.16)",
      "oci.os.glibc": "[2.31, 2.37]",
      "oci.os.openmpi": "[4.1.6, 4.1.6]",
      "oci.pci.devices": "15B3.020D,",
      "oci.compatibility-score": 100,
    },
    {
      "oci.cpu.vendor": "AuthenticAMD",
      "oci.cpu.features": "FPHP,",
      "oci.kernel.selinux": "false",
      "oci.kernel.configurations": "PREEMPT,",
      "oci.kernel.versions": "[4.19, 5.16)",
      "oci.os.glibc": "[2.31, 2.37]",
      "oci.os.openmpi": "[4.1.6, 4.1.6]",
      "oci.pci.devices": "1002.67ff,",
      "oci.compatibility-score": 80,
      "annotation": "only work with AMD CPU and AMD GPU"
    }
  ]
}
```

## Compatibilities Embeded Inside Platform Object

### Extend Platform Object with New Compatibilities Field

> Add a new field in platform object in [image index](https://github.com/opencontainers/image-spec/blob/main/image-index.md#image-index-property-descriptions).

Reviewer 5: Is there an upper size limit envisioned for the compatibilities list of maps? I ask because there is a size limit recommended for an Index (4 MiB) which would include a list of images, each with their own platform field.

Author: Ok, will add size limit here.

Reviewer 5: I think I may want to look at some real world examples to get a better feel for what this will do to images. Often people see what they want from a proposal, and don't realize how others intend to implement it. If a typical Index goes from 1KB to >500KB to store multiple image references with lots of extra compatibilities data, I could see registry operators getting concerned.

For some of these registries, manifests are maintained in a separate database from the blobs. Their manifest DB is designed for frequent access of small but often queried and changing data (latest tag constantly being updated).

Author: Introducing compatibilities field in platform is very controversial. I doubt I should include it in the proposal. The original motivation is to save API requests to registriy.

For registry operator, they may prefer to scale out the registry to provide additonal artifact API request and json blob download. Storing big compatibilities in manifest DB will change the traffic pattern, I don't think SRE/maintainance engineer like it much.

Reviewer 5: In general, I'm in favor of having a way for runtimes to quickly select the image to run. One index manifest pull is much less overhead than querying for a compatibility artifact for every entry in the index. I just want to be careful that we don't get bloat from data that is unrelated to that purpose.

Author: Some thoughts about the size impact of platform.compatibilities:
1) set size limit for platform.compatibilities
2) use short label name
3) use even shorter label name, and a dict to map the shorter name to full name, tools can use the dict to output human readable information.

Reviewer 5: One simple check is if every entry in the index has the same compatibilities entry (for something like the kernel, libc, etc), then the value isn't needed. You would only want to include compatibility entries that differentiate one entry from the others.

Author: > One simple check is if every entry in the index has the same compatibilities entry (for something like the kernel, libc, etc), then the value isn't needed. You would only want to include compatibility entries that differentiate one entry from the others.

it's a little difficult to find a good way to implement it (some entry without value like "oci.os.glibc": "" )

Reviewer: I don't think we'd want any redundancy, between any two places. If there is an OCI maintained label, it should be present in one (and only one) place.

Reviewer: Also I think we should move labels discussion into a next step of proposals. We are mostly concerned about structure here.

Reviewer 5: > > One simple check is if every entry in the index has the same compatibilities entry (for something like the kernel, libc, etc), then the value isn't needed. You would only want to include compatibility entries that differentiate one entry from the others.
> 
> it's a little difficult to find a good way to implement it (some entry without value like "oci.os.glibc": "" )

We may be thinking of different problems. When writing the index, every entry in the index is available to the writer. It would be a dedup step, performed across all the entries of the index. If one compatibility key+value pair exists in every entry of the index for a given os/arch/version, remove it from the index, because there's no added value.

Reviewer 2: > We may be thinking of different problems. When writing the index, every entry in the index is available to the writer. It would be a dedup step, performed across all the entries of the index. If one compatibility key+value pair exists in every entry of the index for a given os/arch/version, remove it from the index, because there's no added value.

That makes sense to me. The tools that create the index would have to perform the dedup step, right?

Reviewer 5: > That makes sense to me. The tools that create the index would have to perform the dedup step, right?

"Have" is a strong word, the spec language would probably end up being a "SHOULD", if not a looser "implementers guidance". But otherwise yes, the tool creating the index has everything needed to implement this without generating too much noise.

Author: OK, deduplication will be updated in next commit

- **`manifests`** _array of objects_

  - **`platform`** _object_

    This OPTIONAL property describes the minimum runtime requirements of the image.
    This property SHOULD be present if its target is platform-specific.

    - **`architecture`** _string_

    - **`variant`** _string_

    - **`os`** _string_

    - **`os.version`** _string_

    - **`os.features`** _array of strings_

    - **`features`** _array of strings_

>     - **`compatibilities`** _list of map_

Author: ok, array of string-string map will be more accurate, and reduce ambiguity.

      This new OPTIONAL property describes a list of compatibility sets, contains at least one compatibility set. Same definition as that in Image Compatibility Spec.

### Migration and Deprecation

The platform.os.version, platform.os.features and platform.features are expected to be migrated to platform.compatibilites fields.

> It may take years for the migration.

Author: Got it. Will update in next commit

The client will query for an artifact using the referrers response, selecting the entry with a matching artifactType and the most recent "created" timestamp.

If platform.compatibilities is detected and not empty, then runtime is not required to send referrs API to query compatibility artifact.

If there is no platform.compatibilities, or the content of platform.compatibilities is  empty, then runtime should send referrs API to registry to query compatibility artifact.

## Pros. and Cons. Comparation

### Pros. and Cons. of Compatibility Artifact

It's possible to update compatibility independently without having to re-release and re-distribute image.

In some vertical industries, re-distributing image means repeating release cycle to production site, it may take several weeks to several months for complex applications, very time consuming and high cost.

The application using new image has to pass series tests inside vendor's lab and then customer's lab, and then roll out in production site gradually. Tests may include function, performance, reliability, security, inter-working etc.

> The cons. of compatibility artifact is, if it's used for image selection or scheduling decision, additional referrs API request should be sent to registry.

Reviewer 5: This raises two questions for me. Does a company need to retest an image if the individual platform digests do not change, only the image index is updated? And conversely, if the compatibility artifact is changed that modifies how runtimes would select an image to deploy in production, should that be excluded from any testing?

Author: Good questions.

> Does a company need to retest an image if the individual platform digests do not change, only the image index is updated?

In software package(or image package) delivery mode, the files are transfered from the vendor to the customer, if a package for example (tar.gz file) is updated, test in customer environment is needed. 

it's possible to update image index(for example, platform.compatibilities) in devops environment independently, because the creator and production maintainence engineer are consided in a same responsibility team. but in software package delivery mode, the creator(software supplier) and the customer(the buyer) have different responsibility boundary, if the customer can manupulate the image index on his own, it may lead to production environment out of control.

> And conversely, if the compatibility artifact is changed that modifies how runtimes would select an image to deploy in production, should that be excluded from any testing?

Can't be excluded from all tests, but can save some tests. If compatibility artifact is changed, the comaptibility artifact validation for production or lab testbed is needed too. If the image unchanged, and existing production environment is also same, and the new released compatibility artifact is validated compatible to existing production environment, then this kind of test can be saved. That means we don't have to upgrade the production image, just let it run as past.

If some new hardware or new os system is introduced(updated) in the compatibility artifact, those tests for the new hardware and new os system (which still run the existing images) can't be excluded from R&D lab to customer lab and production environment.

one vendor may have 100 customers, 90 customers may still use old production hardware and os environment, then update the artifact will not push these customers to do image upgrade in production, but other 10 customers which may use some new hardwares or os environments, then tests in these 10 customers are inevitable.

Reviewer 5: > if the customer can manupulate the image index on his own, it may lead to production environment out of control.

I believe this same risk exists when using a compatibility artifact, but it is somewhat obscured from the end user because the index digest isn't changing. Just as a change to the index with an identical collection of image digests should receive an abbreviated review, so should any change to the compatibility artifact. Treating one change as different from another I worry is either a false sense of security or a false fear of what has changed.

Author: Your concerns make sense(currently I haven't find tool to directly update platform fields). It's up to how the vendor deliver package, and what's the review/modification process the customer will adopt to apply a package delivered by the vendor.

Author: Currently artifact can be a standalone deliverable. That means it can be delivered to customer as an independent package. I am not sure whether the platform.compatibilities can be a standalone deliverable, it's reasonable the fields in platform should be part of image deliverable.

Author: @sudo-bmitch maybe these two comments  are not good enough. https://github.com/opencontainers/wg-image-compatibility/pull/17#discussion_r1565130511 and https://github.com/opencontainers/wg-image-compatibility/pull/17#discussion_r1568090059 . 

do you think that the proposal need to include update like: from security level, both artifact and index update should be reviewed and processed in identical/similar way.

      This new OPTIONAL property describes a list of compatibility sets, contains at least one compatibility set. Same definition as that in Image Compatibility Spec.

      The size limitation 4MiB for image manifest is defined in image distribution spec.

      That also means the size of image index should not exceed 4 MiB, the tools that edit the compatibilities SHOULD deduplicate unnecessary compatibility fields.

      Registry may store manifests in a separate database from the blobs, to serve for frequent access of small but often queried and changing data, large compatibilities and the number of images embededed with compatibilities will change the load pattern to a registry.

>       The field label definition should consider the size limitation of image index.

Author: OK, done in next commit.

It's possible to update compatibility independently without having to re-release and re-distribute image.

> Becasue artifact can be associated with the target image in on-demand mode, the compatibility artifact can be delivered separately from the image package.

Author: OK, done in next commit.
